>> Kyle Simpson: All functional
programming, discussions,
after we've motivated
the discussion in itself.
All functional programming discussions
need to start with the function.
We have to understand what function
is before we have any hope
of understanding what functional
programming is really trying to get for
us.
>> Kyle Simpson: So here's a code sample.
I've got a foo function
that prints some stuff.
It's got a console.log statement and
it prints some numbers to it.
And then I have a bar function,
which calls that foo function.
And I'm deliberately using some
features here that are ES6, and
they're maybe not
terribly familiar to you.
If you see on line 5, x = 2,
that's the default parameter
syntax that was out in ES6.
The ...args there on
line 5 is gathering up
the rest of the parameters
into an arguments array.
That's called the rest or
the gather operator.
The ...args on the next line
is the reverse of that.
It's spreading an array out.
Spreading the args array out as
individual positional parameters.
So, and same thing down on line 14,
we're spreading out that array
as individual arguments.
If those features aren't
terribly familiar to you,
I'm gonna strongly recommend you take
a little bit of time to read about some of
the stuff that's been added to ES6.
Because functional programmers want to
use as much as possible what the language
gives us.
So that we're not dealing with
the imperative stuff, and
we're focusing at the higher
level of declarative.
And that really is what ES6 was all about.
The most important parts of ES6 were about
creating declarative boundaries instead
of hyper focusing on imperativeness.
>> Kyle Simpson: So just I
wanted to call that out in case those
things look a little unfamiliar to you,
I'm gonna be reusing them across
all the rest of the slides.
Fortunately, I've written
a book about ES6,
it's in the You Don't Know JS book series,
that's also available on GitHub.
So if you're struggling to
understand some of that ES6 stuff,
feel free to take a look at that,
specifically chapter two.
And yes,
we do also have a course here on Frontend
Masters called ES6 The Right Parts,
where we cover a lot of that same stuff.
>> Kyle Simpson: But what's going on here?
Are foo and bar both equally
deserving of the label function?
They both have the keyword
function in them.
But does that make them functions
because they use the function keyword?
I'll just flatly say no.
I'll just answer that very bluntly.
No, as a matter of fact foo most
definitely is not a function from
the perspective of a functional program.
>> Kyle Simpson: What about bar?
Is bar a function?
Well, it does in essence seem to be
doing what we want a function to do.
There is a return keyword there.
We are using the inputs
that have been passed in.
But because bar calls a foo,
and foo is not a function,
I would say, if you have a function,
a real function,
that calls something
that's not a function.
That sort of pollutes the fact that
the original thing was a function.
In a sense, it does kinda need
to be turtles all the way down.
So even though bar in isolation might look
more like a function, the fact that it
calls something which is most definitely
not going to meet that definition,
means that we really can't
call bar a function.
Now it does actually do some stuff,
but there's another term for that.
The term for an arbitrary collection
of operations is a procedure.
We use the same keyword here.
We use the keyword function for
both things that are procedures,
collections of operations, and functions.
And as a matter of fact,
if I drew the Venn diagram here,
all functions are procedures but
not all procedures are functions.
Got it?
The Venn diagram.
>> Kyle Simpson: [COUGH]
>> Kyle Simpson: So what is it mean to
be a function?
>> Kyle Simpson: This one most definitely
is a function by that definition and
I wanna talk about what's
different with this foo.
This foo takes some inputs, it does
some operations on those inputs and
importantly it returns an output.
At the most based sense, I could say
that a function to be real function and
not just a procedure,
must have a return keyword in it.
A function without a return statement
Is not a function, it's a procedure.
And it really needs to ideally return
something affirmative and useful.
Not just an early return
like return semicolon,
which you are just escaping
your flow control early.
Ideally, it needs to
actually return a value.
That in the most pure sense
that's what we mean by
function.
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay,
now I promised we weren't gonna
get too much into the notation.
But I just need to dip our toe back
into some math just for a brief moment.
Hopefully it won't be too
traumatic to many of you.
Do you remember back, with fondness I'm
sure, to your days in elementary school,
middle school, high school, when you
were learning about things like algebra.
And you learned about equations like this.
And this was, if you remember,
this was f (x),
the function f (x) is
defined as 2x squared + 3.
And then you're like, well,
solve for x, I mean solve for f(x).
Put in an x value.
Compute the result.
If I put in the value 3,
I'm gonna get 21 out.
The value 3 gets squared to 9.
We multiply it by 2 then we get 18.
We add 3 to it and we get 21 out.
So there was this sense of
f (x) = 2x squared + 3.
And sometimes you'd even write it as y
= 2x + 3 and they'd say solve for y.
Or then they'd give you the y and
say solve for x and
you had to adjust this stuff around.
I remember in my math class
how deeply abstract that felt.
I'm just moving these
weird symbols around and
I'm not one of those people that
particularly loves to deal with abstracts.
I like to work with concrete
stuff a lot better.
And so when I was working with these
abstract things, I could do it.
I mean, I was adept at math.
It was not one of the topics that
scared me, and to some people it does.
And I totally get that, I understand
if math was intimidating to you.
Math came naturally to me but
even though it came naturally to me,
this was still uncomfortable for
me to deal with abstract stuff.
And it only got worse when I got to
calculus, and we were dealing with all
these weird symbols that I didn't know and
then I, I mean, I went full into it.
I took differential equations and linear
algebra and all kinds of crazy stuff.
And I never really liked
the abstract part of math.
Which is how I figured out in
college I better not go be a math
major because that's all it is.
It just gets more and
more abstract as you go along.
But one of the things that I loved about,
>> Kyle Simpson: The algebra side of
this is that at some point in the class,
the teacher said, well,
one way to think of what this
thing is doing is to plot out all
those input outputs as points on a graph.
I don't know if anybody remembers
working on the old TI-85s and
plotting the graphs to your equations.
And well, we never used the TI-85 for
graphing, did we?
We used it to play games.
Let's just all be honest.
But if you remember,
we plotted out the points.
And so if we stick in that x value of 3,
which is over there on
the right-hand side of our x-axis,
you see that we spit out 21.
And that's roughly corresponds to where
we see that part of the curve up around
the y value 21.
So these inputs represented x values and
the outputs represented y values.
So what we did was we said
here's this abstract equation.
And we put an input in,
we got an output out.
We took those pairs of input outputs.
And we assigned them a semantic meaning,
which is that they're points on a curve,
or a line, or whatever.
And if we put enough of those together,
we can start to visualize
what this thing is doing.
And that's what made me start loving
that part of math again, when I could
take something that was abstract and start
to make something more concrete of it.
And then I go all abstract
again when I got into calculus.
And they were talking about derivatives,
I'm like I don't know
what a derivative means.
I know that x squared is the derivative
is 2x, but I don't know what that means.
And then the teacher was like it's just
the line that's tangent to the curve.
And I was like now I have
a thing to visualize.
It was concrete again.
And then we got to integrals and
I was like my god.
What on Earth is this little symbol?
And I don't understand this.
And the teacher is like it's just
the area underneath the line.
And I was like it's concrete again.
So it was this back and forth.
And I basically gave up on math when
I stopped being able to go back to
the concrete part.
Cuz the abstract part was not my strength.
But I liked the fact that I could deal
with something in the abstract and
always connect it back
to a concrete intuition.
I bring all this up to say that
the definition of function,
that a functional programmer uses,
comes specifically from this notion
of putting in some inputs,
computing an output.
That's what we mean by function.
So how to express that in JavaScript,
the true,
functional representation of it
would have to look like that?
I would have to say f(x), do some
calculations on it, and return that value.
That's how I would implement
an actual real function.
>> Kyle Simpson: So what about this code?
Looks similar.
I've got an f function.
It doesn't have an input,
but I am using an x.
And it doesn't have a return statement,
but I am assigning it to a y.
So is this a function?
It does seem to be the, I could use it
in a sense to get my x and my y pairs.
Is this gonna be a function?
Well, actually, not really.
Not really, because this is
using what we referred to
disaffectionately as side effects.
Specifically, there's two different ways
to think about a side effect, x, here.
We use x on line 2.
x is not an input to the function or
at least that's not a direct
input to the function.
It's not a parameter.
It's not an argument that we pass in.
It is a variable that we access to use as
an indirect input.
>> Kyle Simpson: That's what I like
to call a side cause.
It's not a direct cause.
A direct cause versus a direct
effect would be a direct
input versus a direct output.
We see no direct input here, rather
we see a side input or a side cause.
Moreover, we do not see any direct output.
We don't see a return statement.
Rather what we see is a side effect,
which is the output into a variable
instead of through the return statement.
So while I still have the general
sense that I'm computing data here,
I've violated one of the fundamental
tenants of functions and
indeed a functional programming.
And that,
I've allowed these side causes and
side effects to be part
of the implementation.
Now, [COUGH] I used to think that
when functional programmers got all
up in arms about side effects,
that it was mostly just throwing stuff out
there academically to make yourself sound
smarter, that it didn't really matter.
And I think one of the reasons for
that is, I don't have any proof for
this, but I'm
pretty sure just the natural state of all
programmers is to write with side effects.
I think that's just our natural instinct.
I don't know, cuz I don't write Haskell.
But I kinda think people in Haskell
probably also would like to write side
effects and they are just not allowed to,
cuz the language doesn't let it happen.
But I think especially for the rest of us
not writing in a language that restricts
that is just our natural state of
being to think about using stuff,
and setting things over here,
and all that stuff.
So I think this is our
natural state of affairs.
But that is not what
the functional programmer says.
The functional programmer
says this is bad for us.
Now, why is it?
Why is this side effect,
why are these side causes bad?
Is it just an academic thing?
Let me try to give you a clue.
Again, I am not a card-carrying member of
the cool functional programmer kids club.
I'm not a real functional programmer.
I'm just not.
So I have to always come
from the outside in.
I have to give you my interpretation
of what I think it is.
And I'm just on this crazy little journey
trying to learn stuff and helping you come
along that journey with me.
>> Kyle Simpson: But
I would hazard that a guess or
an assertion that the reason why we
don't like side effects is because
it makes an individual line of code.
For example, line 8, it makes that
line impossible to predict out
of the context of all
the other lines before it.
Now, that's only on line 8 but
imagine that was on line 9,712.
There was a function call there.
To really, truly understand
what line 9,712 was doing,
you would have to start at line 1.
And compute all of the previous
9,711 lines in your own
head before you could then compute line 12
to line 9,712 to understand what it did.
You have to do that work yourself.
Can you?
I suppose, if you are a glutton for
punishment, you can
execute an entire JavaScript program
statement by statement in your head.
But that's not what you're good at.
We're not particularly good at
executing programs in our head.
Guess who is good at
executing the program?
The computer.
But what we have done in this choice,
to assign to a variable outside and
to use a variable as a side cause.
What we've done is essentially forced the
reader of our code to do something that
they're not naturally good at.
To execute the entire program flawlessly,
so that they can understand line 9,712.
And if they don't execute it flawlessly,
at every single line,
if they make a mistake anywhere,
they can't fully trust that they
know what that line is gonna do.
If you can't fully trust it,
why are you even trying to read it?
I mean, isn't that the ultimate
waste of time to read something and
then not have full confidence
in what it's gonna do?
[COUGH] So in essence,
our choices here are making the code.
While it makes it easier to write,
there's no question in my mind that
writing side effect code is a lot easier.
I'm good at that.
Not so great at this functional thing yet,
but I'm working on it.
But I'm great at writing
nonfunctional code.
It's a lot easier to write it,
but why is it that we focus so
much on optimizing for our own writing and
not optimize much for
how people are gonna read it?
So, one of the clearest pictures that I
can give of the problem with optimizing
for writeability instead of readability
is that we are forcing that person to do
a bunch of extra work just to understand
line eight and that's not fair.
That's not a good idea to
require them to do that.
How do we use the function definition
that we showed on the previous slide?
Have we use that version of it?
That function can be taken
completely an isolation.
You can put in an input.
Get an output out and know exactly
what it's gonna do every single time,
it doesn't matter what
the rest of the program does.
Choosing not to program
with these side causes and
the side effects will allow us
to read code much more easily.
So, the functional programmer
tells us avoid side effects.
Avoid side effects wherever possible and
I would say, they say that.
Because side effects made code a lot
harder to read and reason about, and
prove.
>> Kyle Simpson: So,
let's do a little thought
experiment here for just a moment.
Cuz I know that we developers
love to take something when
somebody says something and
we're like that sounded cool.
We love to take that and
extrapolate it to its extreme.
So, what's the extreme here?
Well, if side effects are bad,
that means he's telling me I should
not program with any side effects.
Let's write a program that's completely
side effect free, that must be the goal.
Let's do a thought experiment and
think about that
particular program,
a program with no side effects.
Think about how would you
observed that program and
what it did if it had no side effects?
Well, refer to the console.
That's a side effect.
Input, output is a side effect.
A macrolevel obviously at the system
level, it's a side effect.
Well, it could like
write to a file system.
That's a side effect.
Well, it could add dome
element to the page.
That's a side effect.
It can make a network request.
Shoot, I can't really
observe this program.
If everything that it does on the outside
you're telling me that's gonna be a side
effect, how could I possibly observe it?
Here's what I'm getting out.
If you truly did write a program
that had no side effects,
that program would be indistinguishable
from the absence of that program.
It would be impossible to prove
that that program existed,
if you wrote that program
absolutely with no side effects.
It would be impossible to
prove it even existed.
I'll go so far with this little
thought experiment as to say.
What about the heat produced by
the CPU when it runs said program?
Is that a side effect?
It's definitely something
that can be observed,
I think it falls under
the definition of a side effect.
It's not a direct output.
It's an indirect output.
How about this?
What about the delay in time when
the CPU is running your program and
doesn't run some other program
at that exact instant?
Is that delay in time a side effect?
It's an observable behavior
of the overall system.
It is not possible, only in theory
not actually practically possible
to write a program with no side effects.
Functional programmers know this.
Pascal programmers know you
have to have side effects.
They made a language that
has no side effects and
they're like we gotta have side effects.
So, they came up with a trick.
It's called the IO monad.
Let's them get around some of the rules
of the language to do side effects.
Now a Haskell programmer says,
the best thing for
me to do is write as much of my program
as I can without side effects and
only have a few side effects
as minimally as possible.
That's really what we mean when we say,
avoid side effects.
What we really mean is avoid them,
if at all possible.
Anything you do, print to the console.
Add something to the DOM.
Make a network request.
Write to a file.
Any of that is gonna be output and you're
gonna need to do at least some of that for
your program to be useful, but I think
the natural state of affairs is that we
just sort of strewn our side effects
all across our entire code base.
The functional programmer says,
the more you do that, the harder it is to
understand the code base and even harder
it is to fix bugs when they happen.
So the functional programmer says,
how about if I make as much of my program
without side effects as possible?
And then the parts that
do have side effects,
I'm gonna collect them in
a very specific location.
I'm gonna label them obviously
as having these side effects.
And then if I have a bug,
guess where I'm gonna look first?
In the code with side effects,
because it's vastly more likely that
my bug is coming from a side effect
than from coming from my pure usage
of mathematically proven concepts.
Not guaranteed, but it's like 99
with a bunch of 9s after it more
likely that it's in the side effect code.
Just choosing to organize our
code into those two buckets.
The bucket of no side effects and
the bucket of side effects, drastically
improves our ability to read about and
reason about and debug our code and
I think that's a really important effort
on our part that we should expend.
I think we should try
really hard to make it, so
that it's obvious where
the side effects are.
We should avoid them wherever possible.
I love how the functional programmer
typically will describe this.
They'll describe like a sphere.
Remember, I love these
concrete visualization things.
They'll describe a sphere and they'll say,
the inside of the sphere, the core,
the air inside of a basketball if you're
looking for something really concrete.
The inside of it is pure.
It has no side effects and we put
the side effects on the outer shell,
so they're really easy to find and
they're really obvious.
I love that visualization and
this is not just theory.
As a matter of fact, I bet there's a bunch
of you that are already using a system
that's already implementing
this exact idea.
Those of you in the react ecosystems,
specifically those of you that use Redux.
You might not have ever stopped to think,
because they don't use
a lot of the functional programming
terminology within that tool.
You might not ever stop to
think what it's doing, but
it's basically saying,
here's all these steps.
These reducers and
this flow of data that you go
through to compute all
the different stuff,
but where does the DOM happen?
At the very end, you call out to
a render function or whatever it is.
Instead of rendering all along the way,
having side effects in your DOM all along
the way, it's a lot easier for us to
reason about our program if this part of
the program is just data transfer and
then have a function at the very
end where we render stuff out.
That is an embodiment for this principle.
Avoiding side effects where ever possible.
Collecting the one's over
here when we need them.
Making it obvious.
I've gone so far is to literally put
a comments above every functions that has
side effects that I had
to put side effects in.
I put a comment that says, Darby Dragons,
there's side effects here.
Cuz I wanna make it as
obvious as I possibly can.
I even try to collect them into
a file called side effects.
Do whatever you can to make it
obvious where the side effects are and
try to avoid the side
effects per possible.